<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-12" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</h2>
			<h3>MIRANDOLA DEMANDS A LOVE-POTION</h3>
			<p>When Ramon Alonzo appeared next day in the room that was sacred to magic the magician was there before him.</p>
			<p>“You have a fine strong shadow,” said the magician.</p>
			<p>Certainly it lay black and bold on the floor; and, since it was then as many hours before noon as the making of the shadow had been after it, it was just as long as the shadows of other men. But not a word did Ramon Alonzo answer. He went instead to his seat, and there sat waiting to receive more of the learning for which he had paid so much. The gold must needs be got for his sister’s dowry, even at the cost of those tremors and terrors, against which fortitude that endured the ills of the body seemed of so little avail; and after that, if other plans failed, he might become so wealthy with the gold he should make that he would buy back his shadow, or if the magician paid no heed to gold he might find those who did, and arm them and go against the house in the wood and capture the spells and the shadow-box. But his head was too full of plans for any one to ripen; and then the voice of the magician came breaking across them suddenly. “When by blending the metals,” he said, “till their texture is nearest to the texture of gold, we have made the preparation that is meet, the philosophers choose from amongst such scrolls as these a spell that is best suited to the material to be dealt with. And having read it aloud in its own language, whatever language it be; for these spells are ever written in the tongue of whatever sage has been first to compose them; and the Persians have for long been adept at this, as well as some few of those that adore Vishnu,” at which name he paused and bowed; and, as he bowed, one knocked on the door to the forest, and the echoes went roaming uncertainly, as though lost, through the house.</p>
			<p>At the sound of the knock the magician swept out of the room, once more reminding the young man of a spider when some lost thing touches his web. And, left alone in the room that was sacred to magic, Ramon Alonzo again considered his dark master, whom he regarded henceforth as his opponent, from whom the charwoman’s shadow must yet be won. The Master was keeping to his bargain, thought Ramon Alonzo, and it was a hard bargain, and in the matter of the false shadow a sly one, and the Master knew that he had found this out.</p>
			<p>Suddenly his eye fell on the great book, and he left his speculations; which, considering the depths to which the magician’s character ran, had gone but a little way; and he rose up, led by a more practical thought, and turned the Cathayan pages, and came again to the three great syllables of the spell that opened the box. Alas that they were in Chinese.</p>
			<p>A swift idea came to him. The padlock knew Chinese, for he had seen it open. He seized the book and carried it to the shadow-box and, leaning over a crocodile, showed the open page to the padlock, holding it still before it; and the padlock never stirred. He rose up then from the dust and gloom and replaced the book on the lectern, and only just in time, for the steps of the magician came resounding back to the door and he came again to his room that was sacred to magic. He gave one scornful glance at the book on the lectern, knowing it had been moved; and in the scorn of that look Ramon Alonzo’s disappointment grew, for he saw not only that he had failed but that the attempt had been hopeless.</p>
			<p>“A yokel is at the door of the forest,” he said. “He has a message to you that the oaf will give only to you.”</p>
			<p>Ramon Alonzo went in silence, still heavy with failure, and came to the door to the wood. And there outside was Peter, who had knocked on the old green door and had then run back a little way into the wood. Thence he had spoken with the magician. And now to the door that he dreaded, while his fears expected anything that they were able to guess, there came his young master.</p>
			<p>“Young master,” cried Peter, “young master. I have brought you a letter from Donna Mirandola. And does he treat you well? Does he feed you well? You’ll be very learned now, master. The big boar-hound is eating well.”</p>
			<p>“Is he strong?” asked Ramon Alonzo.</p>
			<p>“As strong as ever,” said Peter.</p>
			<p>“Now the Saints be praised,” said Ramon Alonzo, reverting to an old way of speech that he did not use in that house.</p>
			<p>“Here is the letter, master,” said Peter, drawing it out from his cloak. “But, master, there is a word with blots upon it; that word should be ‘love-potion,’ and not the word that is writ under the blots.”</p>
			<p>“Love-potion,” repeated Ramon Alonzo.</p>
			<p>“Aye, master; and not the word under the blots. Donna Mirandola bid me say it.”</p>
			<p>“That is well,” said Ramon Alonzo.</p>
			<p>The letter was written in the same clear hand as the one that had come from his father, and was short, as the young man saw with joy, for he wished to read not too slowly before Peter, and fast he could not go.</p>
			<p>It said: “To Don Ramon Alonzo. Do not send gold, but send me a prayer-book. Your loving sister, Mirandola.”</p>
			<p>Over the word “prayer-book” were the marks of small fingers that had been dipped in ink.</p>
			<p>“Say I will send that prayer-book,” said Ramon Alonzo.</p>
			<p>“Aye master,” said Peter, “and is there any more?”</p>
			<p>“Feed the big boar-hound well,” said Ramon Alonzo.</p>
			<p>“Aye, indeed, master,” said Peter.</p>
			<p>“Farewell.”</p>
			<p>“Farewell, young master, farewell. Please God we’ll hunt boars in the winter.”</p>
			<p>And Peter turned slowly away and walked a few paces slowly, then faster and faster till he got away from the wood.</p>
			<p>Ramon Alonzo pondered bitterly: he had sold his shadow for gold, and now gold was not needed.</p>
			<p>He had not yet learned the whole art of transmutation. Would the magician give back his shadow?</p>
			<p>And Mirandola must have her love-potion, and the charwoman have her shadow out of the box. He had much to do if his plans were to come to fruition.</p>
			<p>Back he went to the gloomy room that was sacred to magic. “I have no need of gold,” he said.</p>
			<p>“It is a worthless metal,” replied the magician. “The philosophers sought it for the interest they took in re-arranging the element. But the stuff itself was nought to them. They buried it where I have said, and have often warned man of its worthlessness; in testimony whereof their writings remain to this day.”</p>
			<p>“I would learn no more of it,” said Ramon Alonzo.</p>
			<p>“No?” said the magician.</p>
			<p>“I pray you therefore give back my shadow,” he said.</p>
			<p>“But it is my fee,” said the magician.</p>
			<p>“I would learn other things,” said the young man, “for other fees. But this fee I pray you return.”</p>
			<p>“Alas,” said the magician, “you have learned much already.”</p>
			<p>“Of this matter nothing,” said Ramon Alonzo.</p>
			<p>“Alas, yes,” replied the magician. “For you have learned the oneness of matter, and that there is but one element. And this is a great secret to the vulgar, who believe there are four. And doubtless they will, in their error, discover even more than these four before ever they come to learn that there is but one, which you have learnt already, and this is my fee for it.” And he stooped and rapped the shadow-box somewhat sharply.</p>
			<p>“You gave me a shadow to wear in its place,” said the young man.</p>
			<p>“I will make you a longer one,” replied the magician.</p>
			<p>Ramon Alonzo saw that words would not do it, and that whatever he said would be verbally parried with skill.</p>
			<p>“Then give me a love-potion,” he said.</p>
			<p>“I do not dispense these things,” said the magician haughtily.</p>
			<p>“Then teach me how they are made, and not the making of gold.”</p>
			<p>The magician pondered a moment. It was all one to him. He had his fee safe in the shadow-box. He despised equally gold and love, and cared not which he taught. Some etiquette he had learned from some older magician seemed to prompt him to give something for his fee.</p>
			<p>“Gladly,” he answered briefly.</p>
			<p>Then Ramon Alonzo sat down without a word, thinking of Mirandola.</p>
			<p>He had never enquired the reason of anything that she asked for. It was Mirandola, with eyes like a stormy evening. Thoughts passed behind those eyes such as never visited him. Mirandola knew. It is hard to say how the flash of those eyes swayed him. He never sought to know, and never questioned Mirandola’s demands.</p>
			<p>“By the admixture of crocodile’s tears with the slime of snails,” came the voice of the Master, “the basis of all love-potions is constructed. Unto this is to be added a powder, obtained by pounding the burned plumage of nightingales. Flavour with attar of roses. Add a pinch of the dust of a man that has been a king, and of a woman that has been fair two pinches, and mix with common dew. Do this by light only of glow-worms and saying suitable spells.”</p>
			<p>Ramon Alonzo, following the gestures that the Master made as he spoke, saw on the shelves the ingredients that he mentioned. He saw a jar holding attar of roses beside one named “Dust of Helen.” He saw two jars side by side called “Dust of Pharaoh” and “Dust of Ozymandias,” one of them probably Rameses. He saw a vial labelled “Crocodile’s Tears.” All that he needed seemed there; outside in the wood the glow-worms burned, and there were plenty of snails.</p>
			<p>The lesson went on drearily, the magician intoning various spells that the young man learned by heart or believed he learned, and naming alternative ingredients that had of old been used in more torrid lands. Of the ingredients Ramon Alonzo was so sure that no mistake was possible; if ever he erred at all it was with the spells.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
